AI Policy
=========

"AI" herein refers to generative AI tools like large language models (LLMs)
that can generate, edit, and review software code, create and manipulate
images, or generate human-like communication.

Responsibility
--------------

You are responsible for any code you submit to our repositories, regardless
of whether it was manually written or generated by AI. You must understand and be able
to explain the code you submit as well as the existing related code. It is not
acceptable to submit a patch that you cannot understand and explain yourself.
In explaining your contribution, do not use AI to automatically generate
descriptions.

Disclosure
----------

You must disclose whether AI has been used to assist in the development of
your contribution (be that a pull request, repository, or other relevant work).
If so, you must state clearly which tool(s) have been used and how. 
This disclosure should be made at the most relevant boundary of your work
or change (such as the README or the PR description).
There should be enough context for the reviewer to understand the 
extent of AI involvement and the reviewer may ask for additional information as needed.

In addition to the required statement we would optionally welcome an informal
evaluative statement on the extent to which AI was helpful or unhelpful in 
achieving our Code Quality standards and your goals.

We will reject any contribution that does not include a disclosure of whether or not AI was used.

Code Quality
------------

As we implement end-user functionality for scientific analysis, it is of the
utmost importance that we retain a high standard of quality. We consider this to 
be independent of AI use but wish to highlight that a contribution which achieves
some desired objective is not necessarily complete or ready for review. Additional
work is often needed to provide well-tested, well-integrated, and comprehensible code. 
Irrespective of AI involvement, it remains essential that you can make accurate
judgements on these non-functional characteristics or alternatively
request assistance and guidance on these matters in accordance to our
contributing guidelines. We cannot assist in the case of code written by AI
when it exceeds your understanding as defined in our Responsibility section.

We will reject contributions that do not follow our [contributing guidelines](https://github.com/qiime2/.github/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Copyright
---------

Code in our repositories are released under the BSD 3-clause copyright license 
(with individual exceptions for specific GPL-3 or similar license incompatibilities).
Contributors to our repositories license their code under the matching license when it is
included into our version control repository. That means contributors must
own the copyright of any code submitted or must include the BSD
3-clause compatible open source license(s) associated with the submitted code
in the patch. Code generated by AI may infringe on copyright and it is the
submitter's responsibility to not infringe.

We will reject contributions where the copyright is reasonably in question.

Communication
-------------

When interacting with developers (forum, discussions,
issues, pull requests, etc.) do not use AI to speak for you, except for
translation or grammar editing. If the developers want to chat with a chatbot,
they can do so themselves. Human-to-human communication is essential for an
open source community to thrive.

AI Agents
---------
The use of an AI agent that writes code and then submits a pull request autonomously is
not permitted. A human must check any generated code and submit a pull request according
to the 'Responsibility' section above.

Other Resources
---------------
While these do not formally form part of our AI policy, the following resources
may be helpful in understanding some pitfalls associated with using AI to contribute to
open source communities:

- https://llvm.org/docs/AIToolPolicy.html
- https://blog.scientific-python.org/scientific-python/community-considerations-around-ai/
- https://github.com/melissawm/open-source-ai-contribution-policies

Acknowledgements
----------------
We thank the Scipy and SymPy developers for their AI policies, upon which this document is largely
based.
